ix
REPORT CONTENT AND ADDITIONAL CLARIFICATION NOTES
Pursuant to the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act of 1965, as amended (2 U.S.C. § 4108),
sections B and C are compiled for each office of the Senate at a summary level with the exception
of expenditures relating to personnel compensation, travel and transportation of persons, other
contractual services, and acquisition of assets. Further, each semiannual report is posted on-line in
electronic form on the website of the Senate in a searchable, itemized format.
Additional Clarifications and Comments:
1. All cities mentioned are in the Senator’s home state unless otherwise indicated.
2. Salaries reported in the payroll abstract are for the period of April 1, 2024 through
September 30, 2024 unless otherwise indicated.
3. For the Senate National Security Working Group accounts, under the Miscellaneous
Items appropriation, the detailed payroll information for the employees who are
designated to the Senate National Security Working Group is shown under the
Senator, Committee or Leadership office.
4. Detailed payroll information for the reported six month period may not reflect all
payroll adjustments included in the summary of net payroll expenses. Deviations are
possible due to the timing of posting adjustments.
5. Pursuant to P.L. 108-83, Section 10 (2 U.S.C. § 4575 note), a Senator from a
noncontiguous State may pay a high cost of living allowance to an employee located
in that State. The allowance paid under this section has been included in the detailed
payroll information reported by payee name, but is not reported as part of the
summary of net payroll expenses.
6. Sec. 1094 of P.L. 117-81 established the Afghanistan War Commission in the
legislative branch. For this six-month period, the Senate paid $2,816,206.47 on
behalf of the Commission from the contingent fund of the Senate. These monies are
to be reimbursed as agreed to by the Department of Defense.
7. Beginning in fiscal year 2019, Legislative Branch Appropriations Acts provided
Senators’ offices with an allocation for the sole purpose of compensating interns.
This allocation cannot be combined with the Senators’ Official Personnel and Office
Expense Account, and is listed directly following each Senator’s Account.